Trump’s Legal Troubles

Key Inquiries
Case Tracker
3 Supreme Court Cases
Ballot Challenges
E. Jean Carroll Trial
BREAKING

Georgia Judge Will Hear Evidence on Relationship Between Trump Prosecutors

Defense lawyers have accused Fani Willis, the Fulton County district attorney, of hiring Nathan Wade to run the case after they began a romantic relationship.

1 MIN READ

Trump Faces Supreme Court Deadline on Claim of Absolute Immunity

A federal appeals court gave Donald Trump until Monday to ask the justices to pause its ruling while he pursues an appeal.

4 MIN READ

Hours after hearing arguments about whether Donald Trump could hold office, Justice Elena Kagan offered some reflections.

3 MIN READ

The allegations of a romantic relationship between the prosecutors Fani T. Willis and Nathan J. Wade first surfaced in a motion filed on Jan. 8.
John Bazemore/Associated Press
LIVE

Feb. 12, 2024, 4:01 p.m. ET2m ago
2M AGO
Hostage Rescue Raises Israelis’ Hopes; Gazans Fear New Wave of Bloodshed

A raid by Israeli forces in Rafah freed two hostages held by Hamas, the military said, and overnight attacks killed dozens of Palestinians, Gazan officials said.

See more updates 8+

Here’s what to know about the two hostages who were rescued in Rafah.

3 MIN READ



A court in the Netherlands ordered the Dutch government to stop exporting parts for F-35 fighter jets to Israel.

3 MIN READ

She Survived an Airstrike That Killed Her Entire Family in Gaza

3:36
Mona El-Naggar, Neil Collier and Kristen Williamson
Super Bowl LVIII

From The Athletic
Usher’s Halftime Show
The Commercials, Ranked
Taylor Swift’s Journey
Kelce, After a Season Under the Microscope, Finishes ‘On Top of the World’

Travis Kelce had to provide even more leadership and poise, all while dealing with a new level of pressure on the field and intense scrutiny off it.

FROM THE ATHLETIC

Tony Romo and his play-by-play partner Jim Nantz’s lack of teamwork showed up at the worst time, our columnist writes.

FROM THE ATHLETIC

Our television critic ranked all of the Super Bowl ads from best to worst.

8 MIN READ

A dark-haired man in glasses smiles and stands behind a blond woman with red earrings and stunned facial expression.
CoStar Group, the real estate analytics company, made its Super Bowl debut with four ads.

4 MIN READ


Some 49ers players said they were unaware of the Super Bowl’s overtime rules.

FROM THE ATHLETIC

A packed stage featuring Usher, Ludacris, Lil Jon and many others on a stage at the Super Bowl halftime show.
In his halftime show, Usher delivered a lesson in intimate showmanship, our critic writes.

3 MIN READ

A man wearing a red football jersey raising his arms with televisions behind him showing the football game. 
With daunting prices in the Super Bowl host city, some San Francisco gamblers embraced an alternative.

5 MIN READ


Is Kansas City’s Andy Reid now one of the best N.F.L. coaches of all time?

FROM THE ATHLETIC

A model poses backstage in an outfit composed of googly-eye circlets on top and an abbreviated skirt of mini googlies. She holds two metal googly eyes over her own eyes. 
At the Super Bowl, Taylor Swift gave a fashion week brand a boost.

3 MIN READ


The Doomsday Clock Keeps Ticking

Are humans the only beings in the universe confronting global self-destruction? Or just the last ones standing?

5 MIN READ


Photo Illustration by The New York Times
Nor’easter Expected to Bring New York City’s Heaviest Snow in Over 2 Years

A storm starting Monday night will bring heavy snow to parts of New Jersey, New York and Connecticut, forecasters said.

3 MIN READ

New York City public schools will hold classes remotely on Tuesday, as the metro area prepares for heavy snowfall.

2 MIN READ


Aatish Bhatia, Josh Katz and John Keefe
The Great Read
What Happens When TikTok Is Your Marketing Department

The Pink Stuff, a home cleaning paste, went from total obscurity to viral sensation — and Walmart staple — thanks to one “cleanfluencer” and her legion of fans.

6 MIN READ

Tubs of The Pink Stuff on a conveyor. 
Sam Bush for The New York Times
How China Built Its Tesla Killer

The leading Chinese electric vehicle company, BYD, started as a battery maker. Its sales have grown by about a million cars in each of the past two years.

6 MIN READ